--- 
wordpress_id: 94
layout: post
title: POJOs In Action
wordpress_url: http://jonasboner.com/2006/03/16/pojos-in-action-2/
---
<h1>
POJOs In Action
</h1>
After <a href="http://jonasboner.com/2006/03/15/what-happened-to-computer-literature-that-makes-you-think-and-challenge-the-way-you-work/">yesterday's rant</a> about the low quality in computer literature today, I felt the need to reply to myself.

One of the books I have been reading lately actually is a book that makes you think and challenge the way you work (if you are working with enterprise Java application development).

The book I am talking about is <a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1932394583/sr=8-1/qid=1142057200/ref=pd_bbs_1/103-2054129-4399023?%5Fencoding=UTF8">POJOs in Action</a> by <a href="http://chris-richardson.blog-city.com/">Chris Richardson</a>, a book with a lot of depth and many dimensions.

Chris is standing on the shoulders of giants, and is basing a lot of his discussion on two recent classics in computer literature: <a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321127420/qid=1142058328/sr=2-1/ref=pd_bbs_b_2_1/103-2054129-4399023?s=books&v=glance&n=283155">Patterns Of Enterprise Application Architecture</a> by Martin Fowler and <a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0321125215/qid=1142058361/sr=2-1/ref=pd_bbs_b_2_1/103-2054129-4399023?s=books&v=glance&n=283155">Domain Driven Design</a> by Eric Evans. POJOs In Action can be seen as a natural practical follow-up to these books.

Chris has a very pragmatic and relaxed (non-hyped) view on things and has a many interesting discussions and examples that comes from his experience in the field.

It is a practical book, which discusses, through code samples (which all are test-driven) based on both various standards as well as open source frameworks, not only patterns, design and high-level concepts, but <strong>the process</strong> of getting them to work and become a natural part in your daily work.

Highly recommended.
